---
name: Linear Codes
title: "Daguerreo : Linear Codes"
topics: Coding Theory
---
A ___linear code $$\pmb {C}$$___ over $$\pmb {GF(q)}$$ consists of vectors which form a __subspace of [$$\pmb {V(n, q)}$$]({{ site.baseurl }}/concepts/vecspace.html)__.

Linear codes are commonly discussed in terms of their paramaters:

* $$\pmb {n}$$: the __length__ of $$\pmb {C}$$, that is, the number of symbols in a codeword.

* $$\pmb {k}$$: the __dimension__ of $$\pmb {C}$$; see [vector spaces]({{ site.baseurl }}/concepts/vecspace.html).

* $$\pmb {d}$$: the __distance__ of $$\pmb {C}$$, which for linear codes is equal to the minimum weight of all non-zero codewords.

A linear code with the above parameters is called an ___$$\pmb {[n, k, d]}$$-code___ or ___$$\pmb {[n, k, d]_q}$$-code___.

The ___size___ of $$\pmb {C}$$ refers to the number of codewords, and is equal to $$\pmb {q^k}$$.

It is common to represent a linear code in the form of a ___generator matrix___.

<hr id="post-mid">

## Generator Matrix

A ___generator matrix $$\pmb {G}$$___ for a linear code $$\pmb {C}$$ is a matrix whose __rows are a basis for $$\pmb {C}$$__; in other words, the code is the row span of the matrix.

Therefore, $$\pmb {\vec v \in C \iff \vec v \text{ is a linear combination of rows of }G}$$.

$$\pmb {G}$$ is a $$\pmb {k \times n}$$ matrix with $$\pmb {k}$$ rows and $$\pmb {n}$$ columns.

All codewords $$\pmb {\vec c \in C}$$ may be generated by multiplying a message $$\pmb {\vec v \in GF(q)}$$ with the generator matrix. Distinct messages encode to distinct codewords for all $$\pmb {\vec v}$$.

There may be many different generator matrices for a given $$\pmb {C}$$. Applying the following elementary row operations to $$\pmb {G}$$ will result in another valid generator matrix for the same code:

* Multiplying a row by a non-zero scalar.

* Interchanging the position of two rows.

* Adding a (scalar multiple of a) row to another row.

This is due to the fact that row operations preserve linear independence. The new rows are merely linear combinations of the original rows. This also means that a generator matrix can be produced which is in ___reduced row echelon form__ [link forthcoming]_.

Additionally, a generator matrix for an [equivalent]({{ site.baseurl }}/concepts/codes.html) (but __not identical__) code $$\pmb {C^*}$$ may be obtained by any squence of the above operations as well as the following:

* Multiplying a column by a non-zero scalar.

* Interchanging the position of two columns.

The produced matrix, $$\pmb {G^*}$$, is a generator matrix for $$\pmb {C^*}$$.

## Standard Coding Form

$$\pmb {G}$$ is in ___standard coding form___ if it is in the form $$\pmb {[I \vert A]}$$, where $$\pmb {I}$$ is the $$\pmb {k \times k}$$ identity matrix. $$\pmb {A}$$ is a $$\pmb {k \times (n - k)}$$ matrix.

When a generator matrix is in standard coding form, the first $$\pmb {k}$$ symbols of any codeword will be the same as the message that it was encoded from, because multipling by the columns of the identity matrix does not change the result for the first $$\pmb {k}$$ positions.

Note that __not all linear codes have a generator matrix in standard form__. However, every linear code is __equivalent__ to some code that has a generator matrix in standard coding form, which it may be transformed into using the above operations.

<hr id="post-mid">

## Parity Check Matrix

A ___parity check matrix for $$\pmb {C}$$___, denoted by $$\pmb {H}$$, is a __generator matrix for $$\pmb {C^\perp}$$__ with dimensions $$\pmb {(n - k) \times n}$$.

For all $$\pmb {\vec v \in V(n, q)}$$, it holds that __$$\pmb {\vec v \in C}$$ if and only if $$\pmb {\vec v \space H^T = \vec 0}$$__. In other words, multiplying any vector in $$\pmb {V(n, q)}$$ by the __transpose of $$\pmb {H}$$__ lets us check if said vector is a codeword (if the result is zero) or not (the result is nonzero).

If $$\pmb {G}$$ is in __standard coding form $$\pmb {[I_k \vert A_{k \times (n - k)}]}$$__ (see above), then $$\pmb {H}$$ is of the form

$$\pmb {H = [-A^T_{(n - k) \times k} \vert I_{n - k}]}$$

Note that $$\pmb {A}$$ here is __negative__, however, when working over a binary alphabet, $$\pmb {-A = A}$$.